AEP: Add disruption cost scale-down proposal (#9850)
kubernetes/autoscaler: cluster-autoscaler/proposals/disruption_cost.md

# Disruption Cost in Scale-Down Ordering

Author: YurDuiachenko

## Background

> When scaling down a cluster, Cluster Autoscaler (CA) is currently not aware of the disruption "cost" the action will have, so it can pick a node that will be more disruptive than others. Users can prevent Cluster Autoscaler from evicting specific pods by using the `safe-to-evict=false` annotation, but it completely blocks scale-down rather than expressing relative disruption cost.

Reviewer: There is also new value for this annotation called on-completion which allows the cluster autoscaler to wait for the pod to finish before proceeding with scale down, but for the time of waiting it will mark the node so that scheduler tries to avoid scheduling there new things.

Reviewer 2: We solved this problem with a grace period for do-not-disrupt: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/karpenter/pull/2874

Author: Valid point. I've added a bit to the _Background_ and _Corner cases_ sections, clarifying that the scale-down process can also be delayed by `safe-to-evict`, not just blocked.

## High level proposal

The proposal is to introduce a new pod-level user-facing annotation:

```text

> node-autoscaling.kubernetes.io/disruption-cost

Reviewer 2: If this proposal is meant to also capture the type of usecase for https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/karpenter/pull/2935, then we should phrase this as a proposal for an autoscaler agnostic annotation. 

FWIW, I really like this idea and we should do it

Author: Thanks for the review. I rephrased the proposal to make it more autoscaler-agnostic, but it feels weird that the API is placed in the CA repo and has a CA implementation section, so I’m thinking of splitting these two up into an API proposal and an implementation proposal, but I'm not sure where to place it. Maybe it should be a KEP?

> # Disruption Cost in Scale-Down Ordering

Reviewer 2: I can add some high level input as to why this is necessary versus the existing replicaset based pod-deletion-cost annotation. (which would be good for the AEP to have in it)

The two shapes are very different. pod-deletion-cost is a relative ordering between replicas of the same replicaset.

This new annotation (pod-disruption-cost) is relative ordering between unrelated pods. Most likely it will be set per workload, so it will be the relative cost to disrupt one workload over another.

Karpenter wants to introduce a feature where we will set pod-deletion-cost for replicasets on behalf of users. We have found that if Karpenter tells replicaset controller which replicas it should choose to scale down, both of the systems work together to bin-pack the user's cluster:

https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/karpenter/pull/2935/changes

The Karpenter project is blocked on this AEP. We are willing to introduce a `karpenter.sh/pod-disruption-cost` annotation today, but think that an autoscaler agnostic annotation would be preferable if the rest of sig-autoscaling agrees

Author: Thank you. Your input partially added to _Difference from Pod Deletion Cost_ section.

Author: YurDuiachenko

## Background

Currently, there is no shared workload-level API for expressing disruption cost of a pod across different node autoscalers:

- Cluster Autoscaler does not consider pod disruption cost in the scale-down process, so it can pick nodes whose removal will be more disruptive than others. 
- Karpenter uses `controller.kubernetes.io/pod-deletion-cost` for node disruption scoring, but it overloads a ReplicaSet deletion signal with node disruption semantics.

> Users can also prevent specific pods from eviction by using autoscaler-specific annotations such as `cluster-autoscaler.kubernetes.io/safe-to-evict` or `karpenter.sh/do-not-disrupt`, 

Reviewer 2: We should look to unify these controls eventually as well

Author: Valid, I've created new issue for this https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/issues/10071

but it delays or completely blocks the scale-down process rather than ordering it.

## High level proposal

The proposal is to introduce a new user-facing autoscaler-agnostic annotation:

```text

> node-autoscaling.kubernetes.io/disruption-cost

Reviewer 2: +1 to the disruption-cost naming. Karpenter uses the term disruption everywhere, this semantic is very inline with our existing terminology for everything

node-b:
  pod api-1     disruption-cost=5
  pod worker-1  disruption-cost=10
  total cost=15
```

`node-b` will be removed before `node-a`.

## Goals

* Allow users to express the relative disruption cost of evicting a pod.
* Define a common API that can be consumed by different node autoscalers.
* Add another layer of ordering to the scale-down process.
* Protect long-running processes from being shut down and made to start over.
* Reduce avoidable disruption to workloads that are expensive to restart.

## Detailed design

### Annotation

The annotation is placed on Pods. In practice, users are expected to set it through workload pod templates.

For example:

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: app
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      annotations:
        node-autoscaling.kubernetes.io/disruption-cost: "100"
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: app
        image: example/app
```

The common annotation semantics are:

* Node autoscalers only read the annotation and never change it.
* A higher value represents that disrupting the pod is relatively more expensive.
* The annotation is a best-effort preference rather than a hard disruption constraint.

> The annotation value is a unitless non-negative integer in the range `[0, MaxInt32]`, so missing, unparsable, negative or out-of-range value should be treated as zero.

Author: That’s the most crucial point to discuss. I think there is no use in negative cost and in some specific cases, it can even be harmful, for example, when one pod has a cost of 100 and another has -1000. So, for an API, I thought it would be a good idea to make the valid values more strict.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The annotation value is a unitless non-negative integer in the range `[0, MaxInt32]`, so missing, unparsable, negative or out-of-range value should be treated as the default for the autoscaler.
```

Karpenter defaults to 1 deletion cost, not 0

| `"-1"`             | invalid, treated as 0 |
| `"abc"`            | invalid, treated as 0 |
| `"10.5"`           | invalid, treated as 0 |
| overflow           | invalid, treated as 0 |

### Difference from Pod Deletion Cost

Kubernetes already defines the `controller.kubernetes.io/pod-deletion-cost` annotation, so why is it preferred to introduce a new annotation over reusing the existing one?

While both annotations are placed on pods and have similar naming, during the scale-down process `controller.kubernetes.io/pod-deletion-cost` is used to hint at the deletion cost of a pod compared to other pods within the same **_ReplicaSet_**,
whereas `node-autoscaling.kubernetes.io/disruption-cost` is used to hint at the disruption cost of a pod compared across different **_nodes_**.

Therefore, reusing the existing annotation would overload it with two independent meanings and consumers.
The ReplicaSet controller needs a signal for which pods should be deleted first, and node autoscalers need a signal for which pods are more expensive to disrupt during node removal or consolidation. 
These values are not necessarily the same and may even point in opposite directions.

> ### Implementation in Cluster Autoscaler

Reviewer 2: I don't think this proposal needs a 'Karpenter Implementation section', we know how we use disruption cost already

The final logic will be implemented in `Planner.NodesToDelete()`.

After CA has already calculated removable nodes:

```go
emptyRemovableNodes, needDrainRemovableNodes, unremovableNodes := p.unneededNodes.RemovableAt(...)
```

`needDrainRemovableNodes` are ordered with `sortByRisk`:

```go
needDrainRemovableNodes = sortByRisk(needDrainRemovableNodes)
```

That ordering should be extended with disruption cost:

```go
needDrainRemovableNodes = sortByRiskAndDisruptionCost(needDrainRemovableNodes)
```

The updated function should preserve the existing `riskyNodes` and `okNodes` grouping and use disruption cost as an additional ordering signal within each group.

The total disruption cost for a node should be calculated as the sum of annotation values on pods listed in `NodeToBeRemoved.PodsToReschedule`.

### Relationship to Karpenter

Karpenter has a related use case for expressing pod disruption cost during consolidation. This proposal captures the same class of user-facing signal as an autoscaler-agnostic annotation under the `node-autoscaling.kubernetes.io` prefix, 
so workloads do not need separate autoscaler-specific annotations for the same disruption preference.

> Karpenter-specific scoring, normalization, consolidation behavior, feature gates, and migration remain outside the scope of this proposal.

Reviewer 2: Agree, but for the sake of others that may be curious:

Karpenter defaults to a disruption cost of 0 for daemons and 1 for all other pods. 

When choosing nodes for disruption, we order based on disruption cost (sum of pods on node).

When choosing if a node is valid for Balanced consolidation, we take the disruption cost of the node (sum of pods on the node), and normalize divide by the total disruption cost of the nodepool.

### Corner cases

> * An annotation set on `DaemonSetPods` has no impact on the node disruption cost.

Reviewer 2: Right now, Karpenter treats daemonsetpods as a 0 disruption cost. I think this is fine for a p0, I don't think there is a usecase for daemonsets having a disruption cost

# Disruption Cost in Scale-Down Ordering

Author: YurDuiachenko

## Background

Currently, there is no shared workload-level API for expressing disruption cost of a pod across different node autoscalers:

- Cluster Autoscaler does not consider pod disruption cost in the scale-down process, so it can pick nodes whose removal will be more disruptive than others. 
- Karpenter uses `controller.kubernetes.io/pod-deletion-cost` for node disruption scoring, but it overloads a ReplicaSet deletion signal with node disruption semantics.

Users can also prevent specific pods from eviction by using autoscaler-specific annotations such as `cluster-autoscaler.kubernetes.io/safe-to-evict` or `karpenter.sh/do-not-disrupt`, 
but it delays or completely blocks the scale-down process rather than ordering it.

## High level proposal

The proposal is to introduce a new user-facing autoscaler-agnostic annotation:

```text

> node-autoscaling.kubernetes.io/disruption-cost

Author: I’m currently considering either `node-lifecycle.k8s.io` or `node-autoscaling.kubernetes.io` and leaning towards `node-lifecycle.k8s.io`, since both signals ultimately affect whether a Node can be disrupted.

Cluster Autoscaler, for example, will sum the disruption costs of the pods that need to be rescheduled and use this total to choose which node to remove next.

If there are two removable nodes:

```text
node-a:
  pod api-0     disruption-cost=100
  pod worker-0  disruption-cost=20
  total cost=120

node-b:
  pod api-1     disruption-cost=5
  pod worker-1  disruption-cost=10
  total cost=15
```

`node-b` should be removed before `node-a`.

## Goals

* Allow users to express the relative disruption cost of evicting a pod.
* Define a common API that can be consumed by different node autoscalers.
* Add another layer of ordering to the scale-down process.
* Protect long-running processes from being shut down and made to start over.
* Reduce avoidable disruption to workloads that are expensive to restart.

## Non-Goals

* Define Karpenter-specific scoring, normalization, consolidation behavior, feature gates, or migration.
* Unify autoscaler-specific hard eviction controls such as `cluster-autoscaler.kubernetes.io/safe-to-evict` and `karpenter.sh/do-not-disrupt`.
* Guarantee a strict pod or node disruption order.

## Detailed design

> 

Author: ### Choice of API Shape

Add a section explaining why an _Annotation_ is preferred as the shared API over a _Label_ or a _PodSpec field_.
